---
layout: post
title: "On Special Relativity"
date: 2021-2-23
---

I’ve been studying for Physics 1C (last class in the intro to physics series) a lot recent, which is why my mind has been on the concept of special relativity a lot. For those of you who have never heard of it or have voluntarily shoved the memories into a sealed box in your mind, here’s a brief overview. Special relativity, discovery largely credited to Einstein, focuses on the fact that different frames of reference (point of view) see things differently. As a trivial example, take two people on Earth, one just standing and the other in a car driving past the first. To the first person, they are not moving while the second person is coming at them, then heading away. To the second person, the first person is moving towards them while they themselves are not moving. 

Another way to visualize it is an old joke I heard: “Many narcissists does it take to screw a lightbulb? One. The person holds the lightbulb while the world revolves around them.” However, I don’t think that this view is necessarily wrong. To some degree, everyone thinks that they are at the center of their universe, since we only get input (through our five senses) from our own point of view. We can understand that there are other events happening around us that don’t need to involve us, but the only ones we really care about are the ones that impact ourselves.

Special relativity takes the different points of view to an even more extreme. When velocities get close to the speed of light, time, length, and even events that appear simultaneous get distorted. Paradoxically, this means that one person think that time is running slow for the other, and vice versa for the other. An object that fits in a container from one frame of reference might not fit in another. It is hard to justify it, which is why I struggled conceptually understanding previously. After pondering about it for a good amount of time, I came to this conclusion: it’s not really that different from real life. Everyone sees the same event from different perspectives, so it’s understandable that they have different takeaways. Sometimes, disagreements just come from previous influences. For example, someone in a wealthy family might see a person buying a designer bag as fashionable, while someone who grew up less wealthy might see that action as a waste of money, or even trying to be pretentious. 

Tying this back to daily life, I think special relativity has taught me that there’s often no “right” answer for anything. What we perceive as absolute truths are in fact not absolute to everyone. We can’t judge others based on our own standards, and we can’t speak for others when we haven’t gone through the same experiences. What we perceive is often only one side of the multi-dimensional aspect of reality, while every other person perceives it slightly differently. It’s kind of fascinating how physics can tie into morality and philosophy even when they have basically nothing in common.